The Kingdom of Speech
Tom Wolfe

Proving that speech evolved from sounds uttered by lower animals became Darwin’s obsession. After all, his was a Theory of Everything.
LOCATION: 247

“Cosmogony” literally means “world-birth.” In its pure form, a cosmogony is an account, like the one in the Bible’s book of Genesis, of the creation of the universe and all forms of life, culminating in man.
LOCATION: 249

He goes straight after three of Darwinism’s central assumptions. One, natural selection can expand a creature’s powers only to the point where it has an advantage over the competition in the struggle for existence—and no further. Two, natural selection can’t produce any changes that are bad for the creature. And three, natural selection can’t produce any “specially developed organ” that is useless to a creature…or of so little use that it is not until thousands and thousands of years down the line that the creature can take advantage of the organ’s full power.
LOCATION: 694

They were turning from clergy into the clerisy themselves.
LOCATION: 899

Darwin’s goal was to show that all Müller’s and Wallace’s Higher Things evolved from animals—animals even as small as earwigs. He had no evidence, causing him to fall back over and over on the life and times of my dog. Fellow naturalists, as well as the linguists, seemed less than riveted.
LOCATION: 905

Obviously Darwin was as baffled about the origin of language as everybody else.
LOCATION: 910

In 1865 he laid out all the fundamental laws of heredity in a lecture and then in a monograph entitled Experiments on Plant Hybridization—and created the modern science of genetics.
LOCATION: 936

Next to genetic theory, the Theory of Evolution came off not as a science but as a messy guess—baggy, boggy, soggy, and leaking all over the place.
LOCATION: 949

They wanted data suitably mathed-up, quantified, hardened (the going metaphor), and standardized in the interest of routinized efficiency. All by itself, throughout the country, the military generated tremendous momentum for a trend toward an empirical approach.
LOCATION: 974

Speech was the first artifact, the first instance in which a creature, man, had removed elements from nature…in this case, sounds…and turned them into something entirely new and man-made…strings of sounds that formed codes, codes called words.
LOCATION: 1920

And this, the power of one person to control millions of his fellow humans—for centuries—is a power the Theory of Evolution cannot even begin to account for…or abide.
LOCATION: 1955
