Subversive Orthodoxy: Outlaws, Revolutionaries, and other Christians in Disguise
Robert Inchausti

The Soul under Siege
LOCATION: 270

In his book The Everlasting Man, G. K. Chesterton describes the power of orthodoxy to renew itself, in a chapter titled “Five Deaths of the Faith.”2 Christianity, he tells us, was never really reborn, because it never really died. The cultures it lived in died, so Christianity was rediscovered five times in the history of the West, as one cultural epoch was superseded by another. This happened after the fall of Rome, then in the twelfth century at the end of the feudal era, again when the medieval synthesis gave way to the secular energies of the Renaissance, again when the Renaissance fell to the new rationalism of the Enlightenment, and yet 2. G. K. Chesterton, The Everlasting Man (Ft. Collins, Colo.: Ignatius Press, 1993), 250.   again as Enlightenment values have begun to dissolve with the arrival of our postindustrial age.
LOCATION: 297

In each instance, the end of civilization and death of God were proclaimed—but what was really dying was a complex set of institutional arrangements wedded to particular cultural premises. In each case, a new cultural age emerged when Christianity was rediscovered as something above and beyond the culture that claimed to embody it. It wasn’t that the faith evolved to fit the times, nor did it exactly conquer. It was more that after each subsequent culture faced up to its illusions and its misrepresentations of the creed, orthodoxy simply reemerged whole cloth out of the ashes of history: unscathed, clarified, and renewed.
LOCATION: 309

William Blake’s Defense of the Imagination
LOCATION: 363

Critics say his [Blake’s] visions were false because he was mad. I say he was mad because his visions were true. G. K. Chesterton, William Blake4
LOCATION: 364

For Blake, Christ had redeemed this world, but we had not yet learned how to bear the beams of his love or act justly in the light of his sacrifice.
LOCATION: 435

The aim of human life, he insisted, was not to become docile believers, but to become capable of acts of spiritual genius made possible through the attainment of a second innocence.
LOCATION: 437

It took an industrial revolution, two world wars, and the shock of a nearly triumphant revolutionary atheism to reveal the wisdom in his call for a more socially engaged faith.
LOCATION: 451

The new sciences stripped reason of its role as the natural ally of visionary experience—directing the imagination down certain useful materialist paths, rather than allowing it to give birth to unforeseen revelations of divine love.
LOCATION: 465

Thus, modern science constituted both a great leap forward in instrumental knowledge and a second fall from grace. We had become both more powerful and less alive at the same time—more knowing and less content.
LOCATION: 472

The incapacity of the great advocates of progress—Bacon, Newton, Locke, and Descartes—to fathom the tragic nature of these developments only compounded the problem and sent Blake’s conservative religious contemporaries in search of new, more rationalist theologies. This, according to Blake, led many believers to betray the gospel’s mystic and radical core. And, as a result, it also led to Blake himself being dismissed as a heretic.
LOCATION: 474

reading the Bible in new reductionist and rationalist terms rather than prophetically.
LOCATION: 482

In other words, Blake understood that when the spirit loses confidence in itself, the mind falls into the objective world and beings to see creation as something independent. It stops participating with life, stops perceiving beauty and possibility, and, instead, stands in judgment of everything, measuring differences, contrasts, and oppositions. This false objectivity can only be transcended through a return to visionary experience, which alone can restore us to our true, imaginative selves.
LOCATION: 494

The scientific method encourages us to see the world as a thing outside of our own subjective experience of it. And once we do that, Blake warned, we start to think that what exists must necessarily exist, and that evil and injustice are givens. Such an  attitude stifles the flow of human sympathetic awareness and cuts us off from any
LOCATION: 499

righteous indignation at the injustices visited upon others. This is why Blake said that a person who is not an artist cannot be a Christian, for the creative imagination is the only vehicle through which love of one’s fellow man can be grasped.
LOCATION: 502

Eternal life is not life that lasts forever; not space-time life going on and on, acquiring more experiences and more things, exhausting itself in the joys of unending stuff. It is, rather, a life free from temporality. Only when we transcend the distinction between subject and object, between here and there, and between now and then, only when we go beyond the concepts of the temporal and the physical, can we begin to understand what holiness truly means.
LOCATION: 515

they simply cannot accept the possibility that empiricism is a historically conditioned worldview born of the ancient aristocratic desire to control fate and manage history.
LOCATION: 520

But Blake reminds us again and again that true knowledge—that is to say, knowledge of our ontological status as creatures made in the image of God—cannot be grasped through calculation, only through a vision. And vision—in its most concentrated and inclusive form—is what psychoanalysts call the “imago,” an internal picture that transforms facts into meanings.
LOCATION: 524

His theme in both these works is that the church lost its radical energy by giving up its apocalyptic vision for a more accommodating set of doctrines, and so the church became more hierarchical and tradition-bound at the very moment it should have become more democratic and imaginative. In this sense, like Milton and Dante before him, and Joyce and Eliot after him, Blake had to create a countermythology to fully express his own understanding of the Christian mysteries as pure revelation.
LOCATION: 531

It is more a reversal of the Christian’s relationship to existing society and to the whole idea of incremental moral progress advocated by the new epistemologies. The Enlightenment focus upon objective truth and instrumental reason forced Blake into an adversarial position toward his culture as a whole. Thought and feeling, reason and belief, which had become disassociated in the sixteenth century, had become outright antagonists in the eighteenth.
LOCATION: 540

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe: Modern Consciousness Explained
LOCATION: 574

If your heart does not want a world of moral reality, your head will assuredly never make you believe in one. Mephistophelian skepticism, indeed, will satisfy the head’s play-instincts much better than any rigorous idealism can.
LOCATION: 575

Our dreams can never be fulfilled, because they are a symptom of a deeper longing not of this world.
LOCATION: 637

Kierkegaard: The Transformative Energies of Dread
LOCATION: 666

G. K. Chesterton: Preaching to the Converted
LOCATION: 777

Chesterton is not so much great because of his published achievement as great because he is right.
LOCATION: 778

How can one fight for the equality of all people while at the same time believing in a morally relative universe? Or defend human rights while claiming that moral autonomy is an illusion? The time was ripe for the healing balm of paradox and satire.
LOCATION: 791

We often read nowadays of the valor or audacity with which some rebels attack a hoary tyranny or an antiquated superstition. There is not really any courage at all in attacking hoary or antiquated things, any more than in offering to fight one’s grandmother. The really courageous man is he who defies tyrannies young as the morning and superstitions fresh as the first flowers. The only true freethinker is he whose intellect is as free from the future as from the past. He cares as little for what will be as for what has been; he cares only for what ought to be.
LOCATION: 805

Chesterton argued that we don’t need a socialist state so much as we need more independently owned farms and businesses. The problem with capitalism was that it wasn’t really capitalism; it was corporate socialism.
LOCATION: 830

“There cannot be a nation of millionaires,” Chesterton contended, “and there never has been a nation of Utopian comrades; but there have been any number of nations of tolerably contented peasants.”25
LOCATION: 835

Nikolai Berdyaev: The Death of the Spirit in the Birth of the Bottom Line
LOCATION: 866

The cultural ideals of the knight, the monk, the philosopher, and the poet were all superseded by the cultural ideal of the businessman. The will to power had been usurped by the “will to well-being.”
LOCATION: 902

The Novel as Countermythology
LOCATION: 984

The Hungarian critic Georg Lukacs described it as the “epic of homelessness” and considered Cervantes’ story of an idealist lost in a realist world, Don Quixote, its signature work and urtext: a human being lost among commodities and social roles seeking beauty, truth, and justice became the master plot and template for virtually every novel written after it.
LOCATION: 1022

The theologians in their conversation with the scientists and philosophers have simply taken the wrong road home.
LOCATION: 1037

In other words, as much as he wanted his novel to give testimony to the Christian faith, he also believed an artist must play fair. Thus, he couldn’t bend reality to fit his character’s needs. As a result, his sinners are as profound as his saints, his skeptics as moral as his believers; and his take on what is wrong with the modern world turned out also to reveal what was wrong with the traditional one.
LOCATION: 1137

Dostoyevsky discovered in the prison camps that human beings prefer to exercise their will over their reason, that they are at bottom irrational, driven not by self-interest, but by an insatiable desire to matter, to leave their mark, to be heard—even if all they say is a curse.
LOCATION: 1165

although he doesn’t exactly triumph over them, he does something even more significant: he abandons himself to divine providence, and by so doing allows those experiences to perfect his character. As the novel progresses Alyosha’s way becomes clearer and more and more defined. He models Christian faith as a way of life: it doesn’t do away with life’s paradoxes; it actually enlarges them. But by demonstrating Christ’s radical ethic of perpetual inward renewal, Alyosha models for us the full meaning of Dostoyevsky’s epigram “Without suffering, happiness cannot be understood.”
LOCATION: 1180

The story is not just a story of brothers struggling to redeem a corrupt patriarchy or religious hope fighting against intellectual despair. It is also the story of how the human soul devours its world—how the hunger for life works—how it is that the good die young, the suicide dies with a smile on his lips, and the bravest and brightest among us find themselves alone in a room with a dimestore devil debating the finer points of epistemology.
LOCATION: 1189

This is Alyosha’s way: through the acceptance of his limitations, his vulnerability, his powerlessness,
LOCATION: 1218

and his need for grace, he ceases to identify with his own personal problems and reidentifies with God’s suffering in the world.
LOCATION: 1218

Alyosha is now capable of abandoning himself to divine providence—not in the passive sense of taking whatever life gives him, but in the prophetic sense of accepting life’s difficulties and imperfections as the very stuff of his destiny. Nothing must be rejected, but everything accepted from God’s hand. This is what Zossima meant when he told him that in his sorrows he was to find his happiness.
LOCATION: 1240

Dostoyevsky seems to be arguing here that if the work of sanctification seems to present us with insurmountable difficulties, it is because we do not know how to form a just idea of it. In essence, sanctity is simply fidelity to the duties appointed by God.
LOCATION: 1250

If there is any heresy here, it’s that Alyosha does not live in joyful expectation of the coming of the Lord so much as inside the perpetual realization that life has already been redeemed. And so, the choice is his as to whether he will realize God’s love in the moment by seizing upon one of its as yet unrealized possibilities or pass it by.
LOCATION: 1256

This transcendent and transformative perspective on existence survived the Russian Revolution in the form of an underground literary resistance spearheaded by Boris Pasternak—culminating in Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn’s world-shattering experimental novel The Gulag Archipelago.
LOCATION: 1264

During this time of persecution, he tells us, he “came to understand the Bible, not so much as a book with a hard and fast text as the notebook of humanity and a key to everything that is eternal.”
LOCATION: 1284

the goal of life is not to conquer life but to purify one’s heart.
LOCATION: 1422

If you want I’ll spell it out for you right now. Do not pursue what is illusory—property and position: all that is gained at the expense of your nerves decade after decade, and is confiscated in one fell night. Live with a steady superiority over life—don’t be afraid of misfortune and do not yearn for happiness; it is after all, all the same: the bitter never lasts forever, and the sweet never fills the cup to overflowing.
LOCATION: 1435

Rub your eyes and purify your heart—and prize above all else in the world those who love you and wish you well. Do not hurt them or scold them, and never part with them in anger; after all you simply do not know: it might be the last act before your arrest. . . . But the convoy guards stroke the black handles of the pistols in their pockets. And we sit there, three in a row, sober fellows, quiet friends.
LOCATION: 1442

Jack Kerouac: “After Me, the Deluge”
LOCATION: 1465

This common disparagement of the Beats is questionable as a broad characterization, but it is particularly misguided when applied to Kerouac, who later in his life publicly distanced himself from the hippies and countercultural activists who claimed him for their own. In fact, Kerouac always considered himself a dyed-in-the-wool American patriot and conservative Catholic whose three-year detour into Buddhism only deepened his faith in Christ. As early as 1954, in a letter to William Burroughs he said that the “Buddha is only for the West to study as history, that it is a subject for understanding, and Yoga can profitably be practiced to that end. But it is not for the West an Answer, not a Solution. We must learn by acting, experiencing, and living, that is, above all by Love and Suffering.”
LOCATION: 1538

What critics like Roger Kimball don’t get about the Beats in general and Kerouac in particular is that it is just as possible to be unhappy in a wonderful environment as it is to be hopeful in a difficult one.
LOCATION: 1544

Human beings are not just organisms in environments or subjects within history, but individual 35. Roger Kimball, “A Gospel of Emancipation,” New Criterion 15, no. 2 (October 1997): 8. 36. Jack Kerouac, Selected Letters: 1940–1956, ed. Ann Charters (New York: Penguin, 1996), 439. 37. I am reminded of a conversation I had with one of my students who spent a year working in an orphanage in one of the poorest countries in the world. He told me, “With all the training I got, I thought I was ready for anything. But I was surprised by the joy.”   souls working out their own salvation amid great worldly suffering and injustice. We all, as Dostoyevsky and Kierkegaard well noted, possess transcendent longings that are inherently “romantic” (often even
LOCATION: 1549

antinomian) and make culture, language, and symbolic expression an inherent “criticism of life,” not just an illumination of reality.
LOCATION: 1560

Literature, even in the best of times, is never just the expression of universal truths or moral insight; it is also a tool for unlocking and disclosing the untapped spiritual possibilities inherent in one’s time. Of course, it isn’t just that either—hence, Kerouac’s need to distance himself from his “Gnostic” peers and from the academic literary world bent on reducing his art to self-therapy.
LOCATION: 1561

“When James Joyce gave up ‘sin,’” Kerouac reminds us, “he wanted to become the Virgin Mary’s Knight.”39 And so if Kerouac finds beauty in jazz, deviants, prostitutes, drug addicts, hobos, and all the other unexpected places Christ is found, haven’t we ourselves always suspected as much? It’s just that we never took the time (or the risks) to explore those other worlds, and the fact that Kerouac did, that he dared to seek out beauty and dignity everywhere and describe its contours with loving attention, invites us to do the same.
LOCATION: 1572

The real question Kerouac’s work poses to us is “to what extent can life be experienced as a revelation of holy sympathy in the very midst of suffering? How far can we open the door to loving kindness, compassion, gladness and equanimity? And at what point must we shut down, and defend ourselves against the pain love commands us to endure?” The ecstasy in Kerouac’s prose is the ecstasy of Purgatory: to live it all again as regret. “All I want to do is love,” Kerouac wrote. “God will come into me like a golden light and make areas of washing gold above my eyes and penetrate my sleep with His Balm—Jesus, his Son, is in my Heart Constantly.”41
LOCATION: 1589

Although Walker Percy admired Kierkegaard, he transformed the Dane’s existentialism through his articulation of a homemade philosophical anthropology. For Percy, like Kerouac, believed that Kierkegaard had got it only half right. To move out of the ethical realm into the religious did not demand a leap into the irrational so much as it did a long and thoughtful look around. We are already inside the mystery. Our selves and our absurdity are, in fact, the very same thing: a symptom of the knowing self’s inability to grasp the larger context of its own experience within the great sea of love.
LOCATION: 1609

Percy tells us that if aliens from another planet ever landed on earth, our first question to them should be: “Did it happen to you too?” By this Percy means, did your calculative capacities come with an awareness of “self,” or is your intelligence entirely the product of unconscious circuitry? Put another way, are you just very highly evolved ants, or do you have a soul? Are you human or machine?
LOCATION: 1614

The organism is needy or not needy accordingly as needs are satisfied or not satisfied by its environment. The self in a world is rich or poor accordingly as it succeeds in identifying its otherwise unspeakable self, e.g., mythically, by identifying itself with a world-sign, such as a totem; religiously, by identifying itself as a creature of God.
LOCATION: 1681

For thousands of years, myth enabled us to find ourselves in
LOCATION: 1777

a world, to know who we were, and what our lives meant. The twentieth century, with its metaphysical skepticism and reductionist science, severed that connection, so now mankind, according to Percy, is “lost in the cosmos.”
LOCATION: 1777

Antipolitical Politics
LOCATION: 1811

At first glance, this road not taken may seem a bit anachronistic and nostalgic, but for those for whom the Beatitudes still remain the last word in social ethics, it deserves a hard and close second look.
LOCATION: 1834

The alternative proposed by Christian social critics to this growing occupation by the forces of international capital is for ordinary citizens to take back responsibility for their own material well-being through more capitalism, not less; that is to say, through a greater distribution of capital as opposed to its greater centralization.
LOCATION: 1877

Our national security can best be sustained through decentralization, smaller power grids, and greater commercial diversity. This is even more true in an age of terrorism.
LOCATION: 1886

Dorothy Day: On the Mysteries of Poverty and Activism
LOCATION: 1910

Perhaps the hardest thing for people to grasp about Dorothy Day is that she was not a political ideologue. She would have loved Jacques Ellul’s remark that “what constantly marked the life of Jesus was not nonviolence but in every situation the choice not to use power. This is infinitely different.”
LOCATION: 1934

The essence of distributism, as Chesterton spelled in out in his books What Is Wrong with the World and The Outline of Sanity, was the notion that everyone should own private property, that it should not be concentrated in the hands of the few, and that family farms, businesses, and property hold the best check against social and economic injustices and dehumanizing totalitarian schemes. The problem with capitalism was not “private property,” but its accumulation in the hands of the few—its unfair distribution.
LOCATION: 1960

It isn’t because resources are scarce that we require large-scale economies and factories; it is because our wants are unlimited.
LOCATION: 1974

Economic ills are not entirely problems of material development; many of them simply reflect a lack of spiritual serenity and self-acceptance.
LOCATION: 1978

Distributists want to save the theory by bringing the practice in conformity with it.”10 Widespread ownership of property is the only check democracies have against the centralized state and monopoly capitalism, the only social force powerful enough to support local government, preserve local traditions, and keep communities self-sufficient.
LOCATION: 1984

“Every man-of-the-world,” Leon Bloy points out, “—whether he knows it or not—bears in himself an absolute contempt 10. Dorothy Day, Catholic Worker, June 1948. See also Dorothy Day Library on the Web at http://www.catholicworker.org/dorothyday/.   for poverty, and such is the deep secret honor which is the cornerstone of oligarchies.”
LOCATION: 1991

There is, she reminded us, such a thing as the heresy of good works—those “accursed occupations” that keep us from thinking. “To feed the hungry, clothe the naked and shelter the harborless without also trying to change the social order so that people can feed, clothe and shelter themselves, is just to apply palliatives. It is to show a lack of faith in one’s fellows, their responsibilities as children of God, heirs of heaven.”
LOCATION: 2019

For Dorothy Day, social injustice demanded dissent, and—given the challenges and the political fault lines of her time—political protest simply came with the Christian territory. Her willingness to protest in the street has, for better and for worse, inspired anti-abortionists as well as nuclear protestors. But neither of these movements take seriously her admonishments to build alternative communities and to go back to the land to fight the social alienation brought about by both communism and industrial capitalism.
LOCATION: 2027

It is not that some are all right and others all wrong: all are bound to seek in honest perplexity.
LOCATION: 2112

For Merton, the modern spiritual crisis was largely a crisis of authenticity. The sheer omnipresence of the political-economic realm leads people to identify completely with their social selves and communal myths—so much so that they no longer experience the solitude necessary for an encounter with God and their own true selves. The way back to a spiritual life requires a shedding of all the false identifications foisted upon us by our own ambitions, our friends and family, politicians, advertisers, and religious ideologues.
LOCATION: 2115

The real enemy wasn’t ignorant white bigots but the emerging world corporate system and its increasing disregard for the human person.
LOCATION: 2353

His vision demanded not only an engaged life, but a militant one, for his basic assumption was that our collective lives would not become more just unless they were compelled to be so, nor could our individual lives be humane unless purged from within by transformative spiritual practices.
LOCATION: 2354

In seeking to redeem the enemy, not defeat him, King moves beyond the epic conceits of the warrior mythologies to a Christian critique of the triumphant self-over-others mythology.
LOCATION: 2378

Victory is not the goal—doing God’s will is.
LOCATION: 2395

If King had survived to witness the assassination of Robert Kennedy, and the subsequent disillusionments of Watergate, Contragate, the Reagan Revolution, Bush I, the Clinton years, and Bush II, I suspect he would not have despaired but would have interpreted these developments as the inevitable move of the pendulum of history back from a revolutionary time to an age of conservative retrenchment requiring even more pressure from the people against the growing marginality of their personhood.
LOCATION: 2400

“Everywhere people ask,” he writes, ‘What can I actually do?’ The answer is as simple as it is disconcerting: we can, each of us, work to put our own inner house in order.”
LOCATION: 2451

In his 1957 talk “The Insufficiency of Liberalism,” Schumacher argued that there were three stages of human development: first was primitive religiosity, and then scientific realism. The third stage, which we are now entering, is the realization that there is something beyond fact and science.39 The problem, he explained, is that stage one and stage three look the same to those in stage two. Consequently, those in stage three are seen as having relapsed into magical thinking when, in reality, they have actually seen through the limitations of rationalism. “Only those who have been through stage two,” he argues, “can understand the difference between stage one and stage three.”40
LOCATION: 2476

The ideas we now typically think with were born largely in the nineteenth century and manifest themselves in two equally questionable sets of assumptions: (1) a scientific positivism that sees our highest good in doing away with metaphysics entirely in order to acquire “know-how” and (2) the late nineteenth century’s version of “the humanities,” born of vulgar appropriations of Marx and Freud, which reduce all human experiences to their social and psychological determinants. What both of these approaches have in common is a denial of any qualitative differences between facts or entities. They both collapse the old hierarchies in order to render life knowable in terms of its most basic elements.43   41.
LOCATION: 2502

Schumacher summarizes his views nicely at the conclusion of his Guide for the Perplexed:                 1.              One’s first task is to learn from society and “tradition” and to find one’s temporary happiness in receiving directions from outside.               2.              One’s second task is to interiorize the knowledge one has gained, sift it, sort it out, keeping the good and jettisoning the bad; this process may be called “individuation,” becoming self-directed.               3.              One’s third task cannot be tackled until one has accomplished the first two, and is one for which one needs the very best help that can possibly be found: It is “dying to oneself,” to one’s likes and dislikes, to all one’s egocentric preoccupations.                                           To the extent that one succeeds in this, one ceases to be directed from outside, and also ceases to be self-directed. One has gained freedom or, one might say, one is then God-directed. If one is a Christian, that is precisely what one would hope to be able to say. . . . In order to become capable of loving and helping my neighbor as well as myself, I am called upon to “love God,” that is, strenuously and patiently to keep my mind straining and stretching toward the highest things, to Levels of Being above my own. Only there lies “goodness” for me.45
LOCATION: 2573

The world economy, Berry argues, is now in a state of continuing crisis. It is threatened by the superstitions of “globalism” and “progress,” 50. Ibid. 144.   which reduce particular communities to mere factors in large-scale policy models. Blake’s worst fears have now been realized, Goethe’s warnings completely ignored, and Chesterton’s insights lost on the “true believers” in technological progress who are themselves blissfully unaware of the Hegelian and Kantian categories they have swallowed with their Starbucks coffee.
LOCATION: 2700

Globalism is the vulgar popularization of Enlightenment philosophical universalism:
LOCATION: 2803

Globalism breeds intellectual hubris, social hierarchies, oligarchies, and ultimately war.
LOCATION: 2806

Such criticisms, of course, are not incredibly “original” formulations, but what makes Berry’s social criticism unique is that he carries it out with a rigor and sophistication few other social ecologists can muster. This is due, in part, to his Christian commitment to the particularism and localism of the incarnation. The sacredness of life is always the sacredness of this life, this man or this woman—never in the abstract aggregate. He brings this point home again and again: what we really want are not labor-saving devices, but meaningful labor, what we really desire is not empire but self-rule, not comfort but integrity, not power but freedom and connection, and what will really set us free is not the license to do 53. Berry, Another Turn of the Crank, 19–22.   whatever we please but autonomy within community.
LOCATION: 2810

Macrohistorical Criticism
LOCATION: 2823

After Hiroshima it was obvious that the loyalty of science was not to humanity but to truth—its own truth—and that the law of science was not the law of the good . . . but the law of the possible . . . what it is possible for technology to do technology will have done. Achibald MacLeish, “The Great American Frustration”
LOCATION: 2824

We need to distinguish between the political realities that shape our lives and the media version of “politics” that is little more than a form of mass entertainment and distraction.
LOCATION: 2894

Marshall McLuhan: The Christian in the Electronic Age
LOCATION: 2898

There is no harm in reminding ourselves from time to time that the “Prince of this World” is a great P.R. man, a great salesman of new hardware and software, a great electric engineer, and a great master of the media.
LOCATION: 2906

You have to push any idea to an extreme, you have to probe. Exaggeration, in the sense of hyperbole, is a major artistic device in all modes of art.
LOCATION: 2923

The Wild Broncos of technological culture have yet to find their busters or masters. They have found only their P. T. Barnums. The future masters of technology will have to be lighthearted and intelligent. The machine easily masters the grim and the dumb.
LOCATION: 2968

For McLuhan the so-called crisis of faith brought about by modernity was really more the result of a shift in primary media than any great epistemological calamity or “death of God.”
LOCATION: 3000

As a result, the religious universe of young people (like that of illiterate or preliterate societies) is something quite different from that of the literate church leadership. Today we are all much less interested in, or conflicted by, doctrinal or dogmatic disputes and far more open to experiential, even mystical, elements of the faith. We have very little difficulty imagining simultaneous, overlapping realities. The doctrine of the Trinity, once a conundrum, is now easily conceived and taken for granted.
LOCATION: 3014

Postliterate man turns out to be just as primitive, tribal, confused, and reactionary as McLuhan predicted he would be: “The West is going East—tribal and inward—The East is detribalizing—going West and outward—All identity images, private and corporate, dissolve, and a violent struggle to reign in these images ensues.”
LOCATION: 3022

Culture has become a word social scientists use to describe the latest configuration of the mythic meanings indigenous to a specific geohistorical location; whereas politics is the 10. Marshall McLuhan, Culture Is Our Business (New York: McGraw Hill, 1970), 66.   word we now use to describe the hopeless attempt to remythologize our collective lives.
LOCATION: 3038

Jacques Ellul explained in his book Propaganda that ideological indoctrination works best with a phonetically literate population.12 The attention span of the electronically conditioned is insufficient for a complete psychological transformation. Likewise, the power of retention of those raised electronically is also diminished. And so any lasting cultural movement simply cannot take place in an electronic media environment. Postmodern fanaticism is, by its very nature, unstable, short-lived, and dangerously fluid. We are living in an age of momentary passions, improvised collectives, spur-of-the-moment convictions contradicted by spur-of-the-moment retractions.
LOCATION: 3051

Electric media, McLuhan tells us, are “inner trips” and so they tend to favor depth involvement in meditational forms. As a result, one would expect that today’s faithful, educated by the new media, would prefer prayer and contemplative practices over sermons, as we can see in the surprising success of the Centering Prayer movement and new attention given to retreats and private spiritual direction.
LOCATION: 3072

In their anthology The Medium and the Light, Eric McLuhan and Jacek Szklarek have compiled McLuhan’s probes into the nature of conversion, the church, religion, and the “god-making machines” of the modern world. They describe his religious reflections as “a golden thread” lining his public pronouncements on the media and social change.
LOCATION: 3079

McLuhan argues that the real message of the church is in the side effects of the incarnation, that is to say, in Christ’s penetration into all of human existence. For him, the ultimate question is, Where do we stand in relation to this reality? Most people prefer to avoid the question. They concern themselves with the content of Christianity, not with its message that consists of “being plugged into a person.”
LOCATION: 3083

I never came into the Church as a person who was being taught. I came in on my knees. That is the only way in. When people start praying, they need truths; that’s all. You don’t come into the Church by ideas and concepts, and you cannot leave by mere disagreement. It has to be a loss of faith, a loss of participation. You can tell when people leave the Church: they have quit praying. Actively relating to the Church’s prayer and sacraments is not done through ideas. Any Catholic today who has an intellectual disagreement with the Church has an illusion. You cannot have an intellectual disagreement with the Church: that’s meaningless. The Church is not an intellectual institution. It is a superhuman institution.
LOCATION: 3098

My formation is owing entirely to the left cerebral hemisphere, which is literary. All my values, of course, were nurtured by Greco-Roman civilization. You can easily guess, then, what I am feeling. In a certain way, I also think that this could be the time of the Antichrist. When electricity allows for the simultaneity of all information for every human being, it is Lucifer’s moment. He is the greatest electrical engineer. Technically speaking, the age in which we live is certainly favorable to an Antichrist. Just think: each person can instantly be tuned to a “new Christ” and mistake him for the real Christ. At such times it becomes crucial to hear properly and to tune yourself in to the right frequency.17
LOCATION: 3119

We must substitute an interest in the media for the previous interest in subjects. This is the logical answer to the fact that the media have substituted themselves for the older world. Even if we should wish to recover that older world, we can do it only by an intensive study of the way in which the media have swallowed it. And no matter how many walls have fallen, the citadel of individual consciousness has not fallen nor is it likely to fall. For it is not accessible to the mass media.
LOCATION: 3127

In fact, his slogan “the medium is the message” is just another way of saying “the Word become flesh.” For McLuhan, divinity and humanity had become one in Christ, as did form and content, the temporal and the eternal.
LOCATION: 3139

Regardless of whether or not McLuhan is right about Gutenberg’s movable type causing the shift into modern consciousness, there is no doubt that some kind of transformation has occurred in the way moderns process information and understand culture. His hyperbolic explanations write this transformation up large for all of us to see, and if he is wrong in a few of the particulars or overstates his case, it is a small matter compared to the very big truth he has been able to communicate: we are very different from the ancients.
LOCATION: 3145

This is where the real battle for the future is shaping up: in the phenomenological wars within civilizations that, if not properly negotiated, could lead to wars between them.
LOCATION: 3152

McLuhan was a Nietzschean culture hero of the joyful wisdom, and it is telling that his Christian faith made this possible, lifting him above and beyond the mesmerizing political harangues and ideological confusions of his day to see the big picture—moving up and down the ladder of Being in an attempt to bring some clarity to our modern confusion of realms. It was an ancient tactic: medieval, Christian, Catholic. But it gave birth to a startling array of insights into our postmodern lives.
LOCATION: 3162

Northrop Frye: The Return of “Reverse Causation”
LOCATION: 3166

Jacques Ellul: Power Politics, Technology, and the Media
LOCATION: 3331

This process is identical to that of idolatry in the earliest times, but its objects are different because the earlier “idols” no longer exist. We no longer make an image of a powerful bull to symbolize fertility: instead we use the image to “advertise” various machines and electricity. Just as the king once had magical powers, now movie stars and dictators have it. Propaganda gives us symbolic persons, such as “Youth Personified,” or “The Terrorist,” and even “Woman” is given back her role as idol through media images.48 Hence, Camille Paglia links popular culture to pornography and paganism.
LOCATION: 3430

tragic, Christian, and yet still ethically and economically progressive—makes
LOCATION: 3458

The key to his analysis lies in his critique of the “sacralizing of the secular”—the worship of method and technique as the answer to all the world’s problems. This belief in scientific progress as the agent of social salvation has the paradoxical effect of making us all less free at the very moment we become more powerful. This loss of freedom is covered up by propaganda that sells the idea of a utopian future brought about by obedience to the new “necessities” of efficiency, command, and control.
LOCATION: 3460

Television and radio are compelling because they concentrate our attention on a particular sensory experience, disconnecting the other senses and thereby also the intellect from effective sensory processing. A suspension of disbelief takes place unconsciously. We know we aren’t watching reality, but the fact that we think we have already factored that fact into our experience predisposes us to accept what we see as true. The medium is the message always already accepted by the person distracted by the so-called content of the program and by his own misperceiving “critical consciousness.” Hence, the alienation is complete, the audience’s subjection reinforced, and the media’s power confirmed at precisely the moment one criticizes its “content.” Marshall McLuhan wrote: “All the new media, including the press, are art forms which have the power of imposing, like poetry, their own assumptions. The new media are not ways of relating us to the old ‘real’ world: they are the real world and they reshape what remains of the old world at will.”
LOCATION: 3467

In this sense, the Christian must judge and renew the world—see it as it actually is and yet continue to “actualize the eschaton” whatever the current situation. By “actualizing the eschaton” Ellul simply means bringing the apocalyptic witness of the liberated Christ to bear on the present muddled realities of life.
LOCATION: 3483

And there are others: the truism that “women find their freedom and dignity in work,” he argues, ensures that the culture will make every effort to get both sexes into the workplace. Moreover, the notion that “the spiritual side of life cannot develop until the standard of living is raised,” a notion reinforced by business-school bastardizations of Abraham Maslow’s “hierarchy of needs,” serves as yet another justification for bourgeois materialism when it has been pretty much established that spiritual greatness often blossoms under the most abject of economic circumstances.
LOCATION: 3494

he sides instinctively with the outsiders, the oppressed, the victimized, and the accused—and
LOCATION: 3508

The very existence of the state is premised on the existence of chaos; the state is the human counter-chaos sustained by propaganda in order to appear as natural and just. Both the state and the media thus deny God.
LOCATION: 3523

Clearly then, for Ellul the Christian vocation is a call to incarnate the freedom of God, for the purpose of opening up and sustaining the eschatological direction of creation and history. But today, he observes, Christians largely conform to the sacral values of the technological society. They have forfeited their birthright of freedom for a pot of soup; for security, progress, and happiness in the technological world of abundance. How then can they assume 53. Jacques Ellul, The New Demons (New York: Seabury Press, 1975), 206–7. 54. Jacques Ellul, The Politics of God and the Politics of Man (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1972), 136, quoted in Fasching, Thought of Jacques Ellul, 95–96.   their revolutionary vocation of freedom? For Ellul the answer is—through apocalyptic hope.
LOCATION: 3535

Ivan Illich: In the Mirror of the Past
LOCATION: 3575

The idea that by not responding to [someone] when [they] call upon my fidelity, I thereby personally offend God is fundamental to [my] understanding [of] what Christianity is about.
LOCATION: 3584

As an ordained Catholic priest working with the poor, Ivan Illich approached contemporary social problems from a theological perspective, and although his preferential option for the poor was hardly avant-garde, his countercultural views as to exactly how that option should be exercised were radically plebeian and antimodernist. He believed that the Enlightenment project to accomplish moral ends with amoral tools had clearly failed and that the institutions embodying those projects no longer deserved our allegiance. The way forward was backward, back to the original virtues that predated modernity and shaped and defined classical civilization.
LOCATION: 3593

The ethos of professionalism within the emerging global service economy was having the paradoxical effect of transforming the spiritual injunction to love one’s neighbor into a collective 58. Ivan Illich, The Corruption of Christianity (Montreal: Canadian Broadcast Corporation, 2000), 9.   attempt to systematically eliminate risk and contingency from human affairs.
LOCATION: 3607

These new rituals constituted, for Illich, a form of soul theft that replaced moral growth with dispiriting rules and procedures—putting power in the hands of those least qualified to wield it and taking it away from the very people the system was meant to serve. Only by de-schooling society and de-professionalizing the professions could authentically moral values born of risk and sacrifice make their way back into our unjust, ingeniously self-promoting body politic, where international social workers helped the poor by making sure local ranchers could buy their property and then retrain them for jobs in the computer industry.
LOCATION: 3617

Clearly, Enlightenment rationalism had not produced the promised utopias: human perversity and violence were proving to be far more intractable beasts than anyone had imagined.
LOCATION: 3623

In his book with Barry Sanders, ABC: The Alphabetization of the Popular Mind, Illich traces the etymology of key words back to their medieval and classical usages in order to make clear exactly how the educational system and mass media have altered their meanings and how the popular mind has fallen under the influence of whole new argots 59. Ivan Illich, Tools for Conviviality (New York: Harper & Row, 1973), 5.   such as “Newspeak” and “Uniquack.” These jargons fill the language with “amoeba words” that collapse technical terms with social trends in order to generate forms of deception, lies, and falsity—remaking the universe of discourse into one large web of abstractions, nonevents, and simulations of virtue.
LOCATION: 3628

Try to talk to a school administrator about the curriculum or to a politician about legislation without using jargon. It’s not possible.
LOCATION: 3640

For the last hundred years, the term has been used in physics to verbalize an increasingly abstract alternative energy or energy needs. We must be forever conscious of the fact that we do not know what such words mean. We use the words like words from Scripture, like a gift from above. Furthermore, we gratefully transfer the power to define their meanings to an expertocratic hierarchy to which we do not belong. The word “energy” in this context is used neither with common sense, nor with the senseless precision of science, but almost like a sub-linguistic grunt—a nonsense word. Energy, like sexuality, transportation, education, communication, information, crisis, problem, solution, role, and dozens of other words, belongs, in this sense, to the same class.
LOCATION: 3646

René Girard: On the End of All World Mythologies
LOCATION: 3771

No one takes the trouble to reflect uncompromisingly about the enigma of a historical situation that is without precedent: the death of all cultures. René Girard, Things Hidden since the Foundation of the World70
LOCATION: 3777

“Mimetic desire” is the notion that human beings have a basic feeling of existential lack that leads them to look to a model who seems to possess a greater fullness of being. The desires of the model are imitated in the hope of acquiring a similar fullness of being.
LOCATION: 3781

For Girard, such a crisis is mitigated through the identification and killing of a scapegoat. At some point, instead of violence being directed at everyone in general and no one in particular, it is focused on a specific victim who is singled out by some uniqueness or weakness. In the collective murder of this victim, the violence of all against all ends, and a human community emerges.
LOCATION: 3803

Girard’s research into the ubiquitous nature of the scapegoat phenomenon in myth and literature ultimately led him to a religious conversion when he came to the conclusion that the story of the scapegoat as retold in the Gospels demythologizes the religious justification for persecution.
LOCATION: 3815

And though this knowledge won’t end violence or war or even scapegoating, it will end their moral sanction, and that in itself is the beginning of the end to mankind’s unconscious slavery to evil.
LOCATION: 3890

The Role of the Christian Mysteries in the Life of the Modern Mind
LOCATION: 3901

The difference between the orthodox mysteries and the Gnostic mysteries is that the orthodox mysteries are not really mysteries at all but doctrines held back from the uninitiated so that they will not be misunderstood or reduced to cheap approximations. Orthodox Christianity is a set of ideas and postulates that have to be mastered, and the initiate has to join a Christian community if he or she is to truly grasp the experiential wisdom they express.
LOCATION: 3932

The incarnation and the resurrection are, as Blake reminded us, visionary realities not reducible to the categories of space and time. What they 3. Slavoj Zizek, The Fragile Absolute, or, Why Is the Christian Legacy Worth Fighting For? (London and New York: Verso, 2000), 214.   mean has more to do with God’s omniscience, love, and transcendence than with any ideas that one must “believe.” They are, in other words, enabling concepts, not positivist metaphysical absolutes.
LOCATION: 3936

But once Christians are initiated, God ceases to be a concept and reincarnates himself as the conscience of their conscience. And when the supernatural meaning of the Gospels becomes transparent through this transformation, reason no longer appears to be the enemy of faith, but its servant and guide.
LOCATION: 3942

The experience of a trinitarian model of human communication makes it possible to talk systematically about contingency, angst, and moral confusion without having to explain them away as mere epiphenomena of simpler structures of cause and effect.
LOCATION: 3956

In his book Intellectuals, Paul Johnson exposed the personal problems many modern thinkers have returning from the dyadic world of abstract ideas and cause-and-effect relationships to the triadic structures and immanent realities of their own personal lives. Their commitment to scientific explanations of reality allows them to make breakthroughs in
LOCATION: 3960

the realm of science but does not translate well to the triadic realms of interpersonal relationships. This often leaves our greatest minds frustrated with common existence and prone to psychological inflation, narcissism, megalomania, bohemianism, and the consolations of vice. The psychology of the Unabomber is, perhaps, more of a universal “type” than many “intellectuals” would care to admit.
LOCATION: 3963

Science (or any other autonomous discipline) does not solve the problems of the self or the riddles of life. It barely even acknowledges the existence of human subjectivity—except as the daunting “problem” of consciousness. Not that Christian thinkers are immune to any of these problems. The self-deceived, hypocritical preacher is also a Western archetype. But at least the triadic understanding of the dynamics of the human person implicit in the Christian worldview acknowledges the need for a third party to mediate our experiences.
LOCATION: 3973

The promise of the resurrection of the body forces them to question reductionist materialist metaphysics or any view that cancels out the individual. It challenges them to imagine a cosmos where the living are one with the dead, the past one with the future, and the eternal one with the temporal.
LOCATION: 3988

Christian thinkers, of the kind I am examining here, aren’t all that interested in defending their faith, so much as seizing upon revealed reality in its highest expectation and tension toward the future. Their thinking is not strictly speaking “apologetics” but something more engaged—an attempt to “say” what the world looks like as seen through eyes transformed by an encounter with the living God. In other words, Christian scholarship is witness—not necessarily of doctrinal or dogmatic truths but of the concrete realities made visible through a belief in them. It is the product of a sensibility detached from worldly ambitions and nurtured by an intellectual freedom that grows out of the gratuitousness of love.
LOCATION: 3990

The Christian mysteries, therefore, contradict and expose the dogmas of modernism in at least five important ways.
LOCATION: 4020

They throw doubt upon all reductionist explanations of human life and behavior—especially the modern dogma of psychological “motivism”—the idea that human actions are motivated by relatively simple drives toward self-preservation or personal gain of one kind or another.
LOCATION: 4021

They confirm the novelists’ suspicion that we are not existentially cut off from everybody and everything else—affirming the good news that we are already One. We haven’t yet grasped the full implications of this revelation because our imaginations are dominated by superficial “differences”—an error exacerbated by modern political ideologies.
LOCATION: 4035

They challenge the modern assumption of a value-free universe and propose instead a cosmos in the throes of a deeply partisan struggle in which good triumphs over evil, justice over injustice, and love over hate.
LOCATION: 4039

But perhaps the most striking challenge to the modern imagination leveled by the Christian mysteries is their rejection of the notion that the scientific method is the best and only way of knowing.
LOCATION: 4043

By defining thinking as refutation, modern science has remade modern culture into its own skeptical image, and this has proven to be a problem, especially in democratic societies, where experts have come to replace citizens as the final public authority.
LOCATION: 4057

This shifts the locus of debate from who we are, what we should want, and where we should be going to what we can know for sure and what we can make happen. These are not the most important questions to ask in any given circumstance.
LOCATION: 4059

The final modern dogma incompatible with the Christian mysteries has to do with the ends of culture and the purposes of argument. Modern science gives us power over the world, whereas the Christian mysteries hold us accountable for our stewardship of the earth and our attempts to establish “the beloved community.” That is to say, Christianity teaches that the purpose of life and thought is love, not power.
LOCATION: 4065

Conclusion
LOCATION: 4083

T he point that many moderns fail to grasp about Christian thinkers is that they have very little interest in changing the world. They seek merely to see things clearly in the light of God’s hidden logic.
LOCATION: 4094

This is why the primary moral task from a Christian perspective is first to perceive evil.
LOCATION: 4120

What the Christian mysteries require from us is not that we construct a better world, but that we love and serve the one we are given.
LOCATION: 4124

The function of the modern apostle, therefore, is to create the silent, contemplative spaces where individuals can experience the truth for themselves.
LOCATION: 4128

We now know that the so-called absolutes of Christianity lie outside any particular cultural expressions of them, and yet, paradoxically, those very same “absolutes” can only be embodied in those relative expressions. This makes modern Christian thinkers paradoxicalists by definition. On the one hand, they see through all world mythologies as products of particular places and times, and yet, at the same time, they acknowledge a transcultural Absolute that unites all of humanity in a shared participation with the divine.
LOCATION: 4163

Seen from this perspective, spiritual growth is largely a process of dismantling false identifications, cognitive distortions, and idolatrous conceptions. We moderns—heirs to powerful world-conquering techniques—are not particularly good at this. We live largely on the surfaces of things, pragmatic to a fault and alive primarily to the images directly before us. We have a difficult time imagining the spiritual side of culture that takes apart illusions and dispenses with false virtues and socially victorious half-truths. Finding our way back to a contemplative existence may require us to follow the unlikely paths of the literary imagination and the lost traditions of prayer.
LOCATION: 4237

The thinkers examined here would undoubtedly agree, but they would point out that there is another rule: the Rule of St. Benedict. And that in the monastic life, we see a synthesis of distributist economics combined with a metahistorical critique. Thomas Merton went a long way in bringing that rule into dialogue with our times, but we lay Christians must cross the bridge he built from the secular side of the divide. This means using the contributions of our most progressive thinkers and art 3. Baudrillard, Perfect Crime, 11. ists as harbingers of an as-yet-to-be-realized, international, contemplative counterculture.
LOCATION: 4251

The real story of our time is not the tragedy of clashing civilizations or the philosophical narrative of the end of ideology; it is more accurately the global epic of estranged pagans—ourselves included—rediscovering their spiritual lives.
LOCATION: 4258
